Thanks. Hi, I'm Brooke. I am a data scientist at the ACLU, and today I'm going to be talking
about the small role that R and data analysis played in an effort to reunify over 2,500
children who were separated from their families while trying to seek refuge in the United
States. In that context, we'll talk about how to deal
with extremely messy and flawed data and how to create efficient but safe ways to process
and analyze that data, especially when it's updated over time and especially when those
updates aren't consistent or predictable. But first we have to start from the beginning
with the broader story of family separation. So in November of 2017, a Congolese woman
and her six-year-old daughter arrived at a legal port of entry in California to seek
asylum. They were detained together at first, but after four days in detention, ICE put
the child on a plane and flew her 2,000 miles away from her mother to a facility in Chicago.
Before she was sent to Chicago, S, her daughter, was close enough for Ms. L to hear her screaming
through the night. They only got to talk to each other around six times for the four months
that they were separated. In February of 2018, ACLU lawyers met with
Ms. L and immediately they filed a class-action lawsuit, because already by February, it
was clear that this was not an isolated case. In March of 2018, Ms. L and her daughter were
reunited largely in response to pressure from this litigation. But in that same month, then-DHS
Secretary John Kelly proposed on CNN that family separation might be a useful policy
to help deter immigration from Central America. In May, this policy became official and was
met with immediate backlash, both from the legal community but also from activists, from
regular people, from families. This was a huge story that I'm sure you saw over the
summer and it really enraged everyone, as it should have.
In response to that, in June, on June 20th, Trump finally administered an executive order
to stop the separation, but this executive order didn't have anything to do with the
more than 2,000 children who were already separated. And so the judge in the Ms. L case
issued an injunction and ordered the government to reunite the families. And those efforts
are still continuing today. Most of the families have either been reunified or their wishes
have been sort of gathered and understood. But this has been a really, really long and
arduous process. And it's been clear the whole time that there was not a data system in place
to handle the reunifications. Data started pouring in around June, which also happened
to be the time that I started working at the ACLU. And so I immediately got involved with
the case to try to figure out how we can organize the data that was coming in.
In September, the Department of Homeland Security published an internal watchdog report which
stated that they struggled to provide accurate, complete, and reliable data on family separations.
In more day-to-day terms, what that meant was that I would get emails like this from
our legal counsel with updates. Basically what would happen is every week we would get
a joint status report in which the government told us the number of children that remained
in various categories. And we would also get a data dump of messy Excel spreadsheets
that all had been artisanally handcrafted one by one. And they never seemed to add up
to the numbers in the joint status report. And so my role as a data scientist wasn't
really to do any data science. It wasn't to make predictions or run regressions or even
to calculate anything more than simple counts and averages. My role was to support the team
in what they needed to find out what data was wrong, what was missing, and what families
might be falling through the cracks. And that boiled down to three main actions. Organizing,
validating, and describing the data so that we could find people, ask new questions, and
understand what was going on. Basically that means rectangulating hundreds of Excel spreadsheets,
finding errors and inconsistencies in those, and then calculating descriptive statistics
so that we could identify individual cases that were coming to us and make sure that
the advocates, media, and legislators knew what was going on.
So for organization, here's a snapshot of the data that we've received so far. And data
was still coming in as recently as December. This isn't big data by anyone's definition,
I don't think, but it's certainly big enough to not be able to do everything manually by
just looking at one spreadsheet. And it had some quirks. For example, here are some different
ways that the unique identifier, the alien number, which is kind of like a social security
number for people going through this process. Here are all the different fields that we
could have joined on. We could call it an alien number A, or we could abbreviate child,
or we could call it a child or a UAC. We could call it a relative or a parent. Or we could
not describe what those were, and those could vary across spreadsheets. We could just call
it no. And so my immediate reaction in response to
this data request was to get everything in a nice, single, tidy rectangle with all the
information, one row per person. But that clearly wasn't possible. One of the reasons
it wasn't possible was because some of the data was simply wrong. And we couldn't just
throw out the data that we knew to be bad. We had to follow up to the government to say,
what is going on here? What is this error? Where is this person currently? In this case
in a lot of our cases, the data source is just as important as the data itself. And
I think that's a thing to keep in mind when we're doing analyses.
But we still like rectangles. Everybody loves rectangles. So the first step was to get everything
into a nice rectangle with list columns. And we did that with these packages. I really
like the FS package because it includes metadata about a given file. And then we could arrange
those. We could sort by size or by the date that they came in. And then we could mutate
over various rows based on what the path string was. And we could map over all of those rows
and read the data in. So here's an example of what that might look
like. If we read in all of the files that match this regex pattern in a given folder,
we can then arrange by the time that that file was created and try to see, you know,
what are the updated pieces of information telling us. And once we have a handle on that,
we can read all of the data in. And so we did this with a combination with a bunch of
tidyverse packages. Purr was really, really useful in unnesting the various sheets.
So what we're doing here, just to walk through, is we're mapping over a read Excel function
called Excel sheets so that we can see the names of all the different tabs. We're making
it so that there's one sheet per row. And then we're reading all of the data in based
on those sheet names. And so once we have everything, at least in
one location in R, we can start to ask questions and see if the data makes sense. And spoiler
alert, it often did not. Here are some examples of some errors, to put it lightly, that we
found in the data. There were a lot of book-in dates that were later than people had been
deported or children who had been reunified before they had even been booked in. We had
22 children who were reunified with themselves. And then 73 parents who had deportation dates,
after that essentially was not allowed anymore. And so some of these obviously are data errors,
but we don't know anything more about what is the location of that actual individual.
And there's nothing we can do from a data perspective once we get to this point. We
have to turn around and say, what is going on with these 22 rows? Because it's really
important whether they were actually reunified with their parent, but the identification
number was entered wrong, or if they're still somewhere else. We don't know.
And so we did this with a series of assertions and filters to help us find errors. And so
we have that nice rectangle of list columns. We can unnest the data so that we have one
row for every row of information. And we have tons and tons of columns because of the variable
name problems that you saw earlier. But this way, we can filter to which are the rows in
which the child's alien number was the same as the adult's alien number. And then we can
look at what that path is and say, this is the Excel sheet where we have a problem. This
is the source of that information, and return to that source and figure out what's going
on. We can also use verifications and assertions,
which we can put right into a tidyverse-style pipe so that we are making sure that, for
example, all of the children only have one age and one gender associated with them. So
if we're going to tabulate how many children under 10 are separated from their parents,
we're not double counting anyone. And so once we get at least a subset of the
data that we feel reasonably trustworthy about, we can start to describe it. And we
can start to put it in pictures. So again, if we take that pipe from before and we pipe
it into a ggplot, we can look just at a distribution of the ages and genders of all the children.
And this patterns jump out that we might not have expected. The two big patterns in this
data for me are the jump between five-year-olds and four-year-olds and the time trend of especially
teen boys. So one of the sort of peculiarities of this case was that children who were zero
to four were put in a special category and expedited for reunification. And so the way
that was reported on, there were around 100 children who were between the ages of zero
and four and around 2,500 who were older than five, which makes it seem like, okay,
this is bad, but maybe we're doing a better job with the youngest children. When you cut
the data differently, we find out that more than 1,000 children were under the age of
10 when they were separated from their families. Another important thing that we wanted to
visualize, and we did this with Leaflet, is where the children were in space. So I think
we think of family separation as a border problem, and it's true that most people did
come in through the southern border, but that's not where they stayed. Children were sent
to essentially foster care facilities all across the country. There ended up being over
400 children that ended up in New York. And a common question that we would get from legislators
and from state representatives were, who are the people in my state? Are there any children
here? Where are they? What can I do for them? What can I do about them? Are there any parents
who are here? How can, you know, how can I in Nevada or Nebraska or South Carolina, how
can I be most useful? And some of those questions we weren't able to answer because the data
was so poor. So one of the things that we didn't get accurate and consistent updates
on was reunification date. We really wanted to know how long children had been separated,
but we weren't able to effectively and responsibly calculate that because there was so much missingness.
And there was missingness because when you don't have data about something or someone,
you don't have to hold yourself accountable. And no agency was ready for this when it happened
because the Office of Refugee Resettlement hadn't had to deal with the problem of reunifying
children before. And this is because the data that we collect reflects what we value. And
when we aren't collecting data, something or someone isn't being counted. I think this
was said most succinctly and clearly by the federal judge in this case, who commented
that we have methods of keeping track of the belongings and the objects of people who are
coming in through this process, but we had no system in place to provide effective communication
with children and to keep track of them and to eventually reunify them with their families.
And it became very clear that no one had really thought this out in an appropriate way before
this policy was enacted. And this question of not collecting data and not counting people
is really at the root of a lot of the issues that we're worried about and fighting for
right now in the civil liberties space. A lot of the cases that we're fighting are really
cases about who gets counted. So recently, the ACLU won a case that barred an addition
of a citizenship question to the short-form census, which advocates were worried would
reduce census responses in a lot of these populations that are already marginalized
and already have good reason to be suspicious of government data collection. But when we
figure out who gets counted, we can start to make choices based on that. So another
case is whether or not we record people's LGBT status in something like the census.
When we don't collect that information, we don't know how we are able to make choices
based on that population. And when we don't collect information and maintain a data structure
for children who are separated from their families, we're making decisions about what
is important. Omissions in data are just as important as what we have. And that doesn't
mean collect data on everything. There are a lot of reasons why a full surveillance state
is inappropriate. But it's important to reflect on what we're collecting and how that reflects
what we value. So I can't finish this talk without thanking
all of the ACLU lawyers, all of the lawyers at other private sector firms and other nonprofits
in both America, in both North America and in Central America, and all of the people
who wouldn't stand for this, the people who, the literally hundreds of thousands of people
who came out, who marched in the streets, who donated, who called their representatives.
This was a really, really motivating issue for a lot of people. And while it was devastating,
there were a lot of hopeful aspects. Because even though each of these individuals in these
pictures has a lot going on in their lives, they knew that this wasn't something they
were going to stand for. And I imagine that group of people turned activists include a
lot of people in this room. So thank you. Are there any questions?
We'll have time, actually, for just one question. Is there somebody who would like to ask a
question? There we go. That was awesome, first. But how easy was
it to obtain data from agencies? Did you have to use, like, FOIA or some other procedure,
or was it pretty much just, here you go? Yeah. The reason we got that data is because
we were in a case, and so we got it through discovery. And I will caveat that with the
data that we got is only as good as what we got from the government. And so there are
other organizations, including us, that have found other cases that weren't originally
included in that class list of around 2,600 members. And so that's a really good point
to call out. Thank you.